---
layout: page
permalink: /cv-narrative/
title: Narrative CV
nav: false
---
Before I started my PhD, I specialized in qualitative coding of dyadic interactions and stress, meaning I observed people interact with each other, specifically couples, interviewer and interviewees, on a second-by-second timescale and noted down their behavior and expressions of feelings. It sounds very subjective, but I had worked on these qualitative coding projects with at least one or two other researchers, and we would follow a guidebook (such as Gottman's SPAFF code) to standardize our interpretation of participants' behavior and facial expressions. We do this as a team so as to establish inter-rater reliability, meaning we want to come up with a quantitative measure of how much we agreed with each other on our interpretations.

In my PhD, I used a combination of psychological scales, behavioral tasks and electroencephalogram (EEG) to understand pain perception. I examined individual differences in pain perception and the effect of psychosocial factors on pain perception, such as having a sense of control or power. I also evaluated the behavioral consequences of differences in pain perception, specifically whether how we process pain might affect how much we are willing to help someone else in distress. To induce a sense of control and power in participants, I use a combination of role play task and memory recall task. This means I simulate a real-life situation where each participant is assigned to a particular role corresponding to having different levels of control and power, and I ask participants to write about a particular past experience to elicit its associated psychological state. To implement my experimental ideas, I primarily use `PsychoPy` and `Gorilla` to code specific tasks, although where applicable, I also use simple but effective tasks that require no code or computer, like writing with pen and paper.